---
title: 'Get the Most From Your Google Analytics Dashboard'
date: 2008-11-15
tags: business, general, google-analytics, javascript, stats
---

[![](http://www.vancelucas.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/main_logo.gif)](https://www.google.com/analytics/)I'm
a big fan of [Google Analytics](https://www.google.com/analytics/).  The
service is free, can go on multiple websites using just one account, and
displays and processes stats beautifully.  But the one thing that's always
annoyed me about Google Analytics is the default dashboard setup when you
create a new website profile.

The dashboard is the place for the most important things to be.  it should be
the single place you can view to and get an overview of all the most important
things about your website regarding your visitors without having to drill
deeper or go through multiple pages or sub-sections.  But the default dashboard
Analytics starts you off with is all wrong, and is almost never the information
I really want to see.  Let's see how we can fix this.  more

### The Default Dashboard

[![Google Analyics Default Dashboard
Setup](http://www.vancelucas.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/google-analyics-before.jpg)](http://www.vancelucas.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/google-analyics-before.jpg)[/caption]

The first thing to note here is the repetitive information.  The "Visitors
Overview" widget is the first thing you want to get rid of.  The exact same
information is displayed larger above - no use in repeating the same
information twice in the same screen area.  To the right of that is the "Map
Overlay" widget.  While this information may be neat to see, it's not really
the real information you need day to day.  That one's leaving our dashboard
too.  So that leaves the two bottom widgets - "Traffic Sources Overview" and
"Content Overview".  These both can stay, but perhaps can be arranged a bit
differently.

### The Information You Need

For most webmasters, there are essentially two important questions: " How are
visitors getting to my website?" and " What are visitors doing on my
website?".  The widgets we select for our dashboard must help us quickly answer
those every day questions without having to drill any deeper or take any more
of our time.  We also need only the information that isn't already present on
the dashboard that we can't edit.

### A More Useful Dashboard

[![Google Analytics Customized
Dashboard](http://www.vancelucas.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/google-analyics-after.jpg)](http://www.vancelucas.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/11/google-analyics-after.jpg)[/caption]

With a customized dashboard, we can now have the information we really need on
a daily basis that help us answer our every day questions:

**How are visitors getting to my website?**

I can clearly see here that the dominant source is Google searches, followed by
direct type-ins and the typo domain that redirects to the real site.  I can
also see the top search keywords that visitors used to reach my website, which
is very useful for measuring
[SEO](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Search_engine_optimization) effectiveness.

Another dashboard widget I like to have to help answer this question is the
"Referring Sites" widget.  This tells me the actual websites referring visitors
to me through links.  This is especially helpful if the site gets mentioned in
a blog post or article so you can know about it quickly.

If you run any Google Adwords campaigns, there is also an Adwords section and a
dashboard widget for campaign clickthroughs and conversions that may be
helpful.


**What are visitors doing on my website?**

This question may take a bit more analysis to answer because there are many
parts to this.  The "Content Overview" widget helps us spot the most popular
pages and areas of the website, which helps us solve most of this question.

Taking the analysis further, you may want to [setup conversion
goals](http://www.google.com/support/googleanalytics/bin/answer.py?hl=en&answer=55515)
and add a dashboard widget to display the number of daily goal conversions. 
You can also add widgets for the entrance and exit pages, among many other
things.

### Conclusion

Most of the time for most of my websites, I have only the widgets above shown
on the customized dashboard image above.  The great thing about Google
Analytics is that it can be customized with any widgets you want to display. 
So although the default widgets are not particularly useful on a day to day
basis, they can easily be replaced with widgets containing information that is
useful.

One more final thing about Google Anlytics is that the date range can be
customized as well.  In the screenshots above, stats for the whole month are
displayed.  If you have a larger website, you may want to customize the date
range to a week or even a single day to get a better understanding of what's
going on most recently.  The drawback of course, as anyone that uses Google
Analytics knows, is that the stats aren't live or real-time.  There is a
24-hour delay because all the stats are compiled and processed at the end of
each day.  I'm not going to complain about it because the product is free, but
just remember that if you do choose to view a single day, you will have to
select the previous day instead of the current one.

