---
title: 'Why WordPress Should Not Have Won the Open Source CMS Award'
date: 2009-12-23
tags: awards, cms, drupal, joomla, modx, open-source, open-source-cms-awards, opinion, php, programming, silverstripe, wordpress
---

Packt Publishing announced the winners for their annual [Open Source CMS
Award](http://www.packtpub.com/award) in November, and since then I have been a
bit disturbed that the 2009 [winner was
WordPress](http://wordpress.org/development/2009/11/wordpress-wins-cms-award/).
My first reaction was this:

> "... So a blogging platform won the content management system award? How sad is that?"

My knee-jerk "how sad is that?" reaction comes not because I don't think
WordPress is worthy, but because of what it implies about the state of other
open source CMS projects. The reaction comes from the fact that a **blogging
platform is kicking your CMS's ass in its own category**.

READMORE

WordPress bridges both the blogging and CMS categories due to the 'Pages'
feature, and is extremely useful for managing a blog-focused website. Mostly.
That is, until you want to do something that a CMS should be good at, like have
an event calendar, custom form, photo gallery, etc. - which is why WordPress is
not focused on being a CMS in the first place. Yet it does such a better job at
the basic things like creating new pages, tagging, categorizing, comments, and
having custom SEO-friendly URLs out of the box that it edged out other software
projects like [Drupal](http://drupal.org/) [MODx](http://modxcms.com/) and
[Joomla!](http://www.joomla.org/) [SilverStripe](http://www.silverstripe.com/)
whose sole focus is content management. Sad indeed.

The fact that I can go through [literally
hundreds](http://php.opensourcecms.com/scripts/show.php?catid=1&cat=CMS%20/%20Portals)
of open source content management systems and still end up settling on
WordPress because I know it's the only one that won't totally confuse my client
is what's sad. Usability and ease of use matter. They are the number one
feature to the end user. If you're involved in a CMS project, you need to do
better. A lot better.  **Right now**.


**UPDATE**: Some commenters have pointed out that the awards website has a
specific rule:

> Previous winners of the Overall category are not eligible for the Overall
> category in 2009. Previous winners compete amongst one another in a separate
> Hall of Fame category designed specifically for them.

Since both Drupal and Joomla! have won the award previously and thus were
automatically excluded, I replaced their names with the CMS projects that were
2nd and 3rd behind WordPress (MODx and SilverStripe) instead. The premise of
the post still holds true.
